.. clg documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart2 on Thu Jul 11 14:29:59 2013.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Welcome to clg's documentation!
===============================

Overview
--------
This module is a wrapper to ``argparse`` module. Its goal is to generate a
custom and advanced command-line from a formatted dictionary. The sequence of
subparsers is not limited but it is not possible to have a (sub)parser that have
both subparsers and options. The idea is really to not write dozens or hundreds
of lines of code to generate the command-line but to outsource it to a file in a
"classic" format (YAML, JSON, ...).

When parsing a dictionary in Python, keys are retrieved randomly, so with a
simple dictionary, it is not possible to order keys (ie: options and subparsers).
That's why it is better to use **OrderedDict** (from the module ``collections``)
for ordering subparsers and options. The module provide a class for loading a
YAML file as in. ``simplejson`` module for JSON file support it by default.

Groups and mutually exclusive groups from ``argparse`` are implemented but, as
I wanted some relatively complex behaviours, "post" checks have been implemented.
It means that after the command is parsed, according to the configuration, some
additionaly checks can be done (like checking dependencies between options).

Installation
------------

Module is on **PyPi**, so ``pip install clg`` is enough.

Otherwise sources are on github: https://github.com/fmenabe/python-clg

Structure of the configuration
------------------------------

The configuration corresponds of a chain of parsers. Each parsers have either
subparsers or options and args. If the current parser have subparsers, the
key **subparsers** is used and the value is a dictionary which keys are the
names of subparsers. These subparsers can have subparsers or options, and so
on.

When it is a "real" parser (ie: no subparsers but options and args), allowed
keywords are:

    * **usage**
    * **desc**
    * **options**
    * **args**
    * **groups**
    * **exclusive_groups**
    * **execute**

usage
^^^^^
This allow to redifined the usage of the parser if the default usage generated
by the ``argparse`` module is not enough.

desc
^^^^
This allow to add a description of the parser parser between usage and options
descriptions (see http://docs.python.org/dev/library/argparse.html#description
for more details).

options
^^^^^^^
Define the options of the parser. This is a dictionary where keys are the names
of the options and values a dictionary with the option parameters. By default,
the name of the option in the configuration is use to generate an option in the
parser which begin by ``--`` and, underscores and spaces, are replaced by ``-``
(For example ``my_option`` in the configuration will add an option
``--my-option`` to the parser). The parameters of an option are not an exact
mapping to ``argparse`` options parameters. Allowed parameters are:

    * **short**
    * **help**
    * **type**
    * **required**
    * **default**
    * **choices**
    * **need**
    * **conflict**

.. note:: As the help is automatically added to a parser, ``-h``/``--help``
   options are not available.

short
"""""
As say previously, each option as a long format beginning with ``--``. This
section allow to add a short format for the option beginning with ``-``.

help
""""
String that indicate the purpose of the option. See
http://docs.python.org/dev/library/argparse.html#help for more details. When the
message is added in the parser, the pattern ``$DEFAULT$`` is replaced by the
value of **default** parameter.

type
""""
By default, the type of an option is *str*. Allowed types are:

    * *bool* => ``argparse`` equivalent is ``action='store_true'``
    * *list* => ``argparse`` equivalent is ``nargs='*'``
    * any built-in types and functions

.. note:: When parsing the command-line, value of options that are not in the
   command-line or have not default value is *None* at the exception of the
   *list* type which have for default value an empty list (``[]``).

default
"""""""
Default value of the option (see
http://docs.python.org/dev/library/argparse.html#default for more details).

required
""""""""
Boolean indicating if the option must be in the command (see
http://docs.python.org/dev/library/argparse.html#required for more details).

choices
"""""""
List of possible choices for this option (see
http://docs.python.org/dev/library/argparse.html#choices for more details).

need
""""
This option is one of the "post" checks performed after the command is parsed.
This is a list containing the options that the current option absolutely need.

conflict
""""""""
This option is another one of the "post" checks. This is a list containing
options that absolutely not be in the command when the current option is used.


args
^^^^
Arguments of the command. Same parameters that options.


groups
^^^^^^
Group options (see
http://docs.python.org/dev/library/argparse.html#argument-groups for more
details). Theses options must be defined in the **options** section.


exclusive_groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Define a group of exclusives options (see
http://docs.python.org/dev/library/argparse.html#mutual-exclusion for more
details). This section is a list of dictionaries. Dictionaries can contain a
**required** key that indicate if at least one of the exclusive option must be
in the command. The second key is **options** and indicate options of the
exclusive group.

**Example**:

.. code-block:: yaml

    exclusive_groups:
        -
            required: True
            options:
                - name
                - file

execute
^^^^^^^
Section that indicate what must be done after the command is parsed.

For now only a **module** section has been implemented, which launch a function
in an external file. For loading the file, the ``imp`` module is used. By
default the *find_module* method of this module search the file in any directory
of **sys.path**. By default, directory of the main program is in **sys.path** so
any relative path will have this directory for root. If an absolute path is
given, the dirname of the path will be pass to the *find_module* method.

The executed function defined in the external file must take only one argument:
arguments from the command-line. If no function are defined, ``main`` function
will be executed.

**Example:**

.. code-block:: yaml

    execute:
        module:
            path: lib/deploy.py
            function: main

Python program
--------------

This is the simpler part. You need to import the module ``clg`` and the module
for loading your configuration file. Then you initialize the **CommandLine**
object with the loaded configuration. Finally, you just need to use *parse*
method for parsing the command. If there is an **execute** section, this one
will be executed. In all case a **Namespace** with arguments is returned.

.. note:: Personnaly, I prefer YAML for this type of configuration file (in
   particular for the simple syntax and anchors), but it is possible to use
   JSON or any formats that manage python dictionaries.

With ``argparse``, parsing of the command-line return a **Namespace**.
Unfortunately, this namespace is not iterable and it not is possible to access
elements like dictionnaries (with ``[]``). A custom **Namespace** has been
implemented which implement ``__iter__`` and ``__getitem__`` functions for
resolving this problem.


YAML example
^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. code-block:: python

    import clg
    import yaml

    def main():
        command = clg.CommandLine(
            yaml.load(open('command.yml'), Loader=clg.YAMLOrderedDictLoader)
        )
        args = command.parse()

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()

JSON example
^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. code-block:: python

    import clg
    import simplejson as json

    def main():
        command = clg.CommandLine(
            json.loads(open('command.json'), object_pairs_hook=OrderedDict)
        )
        args = command.parse()

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()


Examples
--------

No subparsers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This example show a basic program with no subparsers (in YAML).

YAML file
"""""""""
.. code-block:: yaml

    options:
        foo:
            short: -f
            help: foo help
            required: True
        bar:
            short: -b
            help: bar help
            type: int
            default: 1

Program
"""""""
.. code-block:: python

    import clg
    import yaml
    from pprint import pprint

    command = clg.CommandLine(
        yaml.load(open('command.yml'), Loader=clg.YAMLOrderedDictLoader)
    )
    command.parse()
    args = command.args
    pprint(vars(args))
    print args.foo, args['bar']

    #Â Parse arguments.
    for (arg, value) in sorted(args):
        print arg, value

Tests
"""""
.. code-block:: bash

    # python prog.py --help
    usage: prog.py [-h] -f FOO [-b BAR]

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help         show this help message and exit
      -f FOO, --foo FOO  foo help
      -b BAR, --bar BAR  bar help

    # python prog.py
    usage: prog.py [-h] -f FOO [-b BAR]
    prog.py: error: argument -f/--foo is required

    # python prog.py -f test
    {'bar': 1, 'foo': 'test'}
    test 1
    foo test
    bar 1

    # python prog.py -f test --bar 2
    {'bar': 2, 'foo': 'test'}
    test 2
    foo test
    bar 2


Example with subparsers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This example show a configuration with multiple parsers in YAML. This is really
an example for showing what can be done with subparsers but with no other
interest.

YAML file
"""""""""
.. code-block:: yaml

    subparsers:
        parser1:
            subparsers:
                parser11:
                    options:
                        option111:
                            type: int
                            help: >
                                Help of the first option of the first subparser
                                of the fist parser.
                        option112:
                            type: list
                            help: >
                                Help of second option of the fist subparser of
                                the first parser.
                parser12:
                    options:
                        option121:
                            type:bool
                            help: >
                                Help of the first option of the second subparser
                                of the fist parser.
                        option122:
                            type: bool
                            default: True
                            help: >
                                Help of the second option of the second subparser
                                of the fist parser.

        parser2:
            options:
                option21:
                    help: Help of the first option of the second parser.
                option22:
                    help: Help of the second option of the second parser.

Program
"""""""
.. code-block:: python

    import clg
    import yaml
    from pprint import pprint

    command = clg.CommandLine(
        yaml.load(open('command.yml'), Loader=clg.YAMLOrderedDictLoader)
    )
    args = command.parse()
    pprint(vars(args))

Tests
"""""
.. code-block:: bash

    # python prog.py
    usage: prog.py [-h] {parser1,parser2} ...
    prog.py: error: too few arguments

    # python prog.py parser1
    usage: prog.py parser1 [-h] {parser11,parser12} ...
    prog.py parser1: error: too few arguments

    # python prog.py parser1 parser11
    {'command0': 'parser1',
     'command1': 'parser11',
     'option111': None,
     'option112': []}

    # python prog.py parser1 parser11 --help
    usage: prog.py parser1 parser11 [-h] [--option111 OPTION111]
                                    [--option112 [OPTION112 [OPTION112 ...]]]

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      --option111 OPTION111
                            Help of the first option of the first subparser of the
                            fist parser.
      --option112 [OPTION112 [OPTION112 ...]]
                            Help of second option of the fist subparser of the
                            first parser.

    # python prog.py parser1 parser11 --option111 test
    usage: prog.py parser1 parser11 [-h] [--option111 OPTION111]
                                    [--option112 [OPTION112 [OPTION112 ...]]]
    prog.py parser1 parser11: error: argument --option111: invalid int value: 'test'

    # python prog.py parser1 parser11 --option112 foo bar
    {'command0': 'parser1',
     'command1': 'parser11',
     'option111': None,
     'option112': ['foo', 'bar']}

    # python prog.py parser1 parser12 --help
    usage: prog.py parser1 parser12 [-h] [--option121] [--option122]

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help   show this help message and exit
      --option121  Help of the first option of the second subparser of the fist
                   parser.
      --option122  Help of the second option of the second subparser of the fist
                   parser.

    # python prog.py parser1 parser12
    {'command0': 'parser1',
     'command1': 'parser12',
     'option121': False,
     'option122': False}

    # python prog.py parser1 parser12 --option122
    {'command0': 'parser1',
     'command1': 'parser12',
     'option121': False,
     'option122': True}

    # python prog.py parser2
    {'command0': 'parser2', 'option21': None, 'option22': None}

    # python prog.py parser2 --option21 foo --option22 bar
    {'command0': 'parser2', 'option21': 'foo', 'option22': 'bar'}

Real-life example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This example is a program I made for managing KVM guests. Actually, there is
only two commands for deploying and migrating guests. For each of theses
commands, it is possible to deploy/migrate one guest or to use a YAML file which
allow to deploy/migrate multiple guests successively. For example, for deploying
a new guest, we need the name of the guest (``--name``), the hypervisor on
which it will be deploy (``--dst-host``), the model on which it is based
(``--model``) and the network configuration (``--interfaces``). In per guest
deployment, all theses parameters must be in the command-line. When using a YAML
file (``--file``), the name and the network configuration must absolutely be
defined in the deployment file. Others parameters will be retrieved from the
command-line if they are not defined in the file.

To summarize, ``--name`` and ``--file`` options can't be used at the same time.
If ``--name`` is used, ``--dst-host``, ``--model``, ``--interfaces`` options
must be in the command-line. If ``--file`` is used, ``--interfaces`` option must
no be in the command-line but ``--dst-host`` and ``--model`` options may be in
the command. There also are many options which are rarely used because they are
optionals or have default values.

Each command use an external module for implemented the logic. A *main*
function, taking the command-line Namespace as argument, has been implemented.
For the example, theses functions will only print the command-line arguments.

YAML file
"""""""""
:download:`Get the file <kvm.yml>`

Program
"""""""
*vm.py*:

.. code-block:: python

    import clg
    import yaml
    from pprint import pprint

    command = clg.CommandLine(
        yaml.load(open('command.yml'), Loader=clg.YAMLOrderedDictLoader)
    )
    command.parse()

*lib/deploy.py*

.. code-block:: python

    from pprint import pprint
    def main(args):
        print "'main' function on 'deploy' module"
        pprint(vars(args))

*lib/migrate.py*

.. code-block:: python

    from pprint import pprint
    def main(args):
        print "'main' function on 'migrate' module"
        pprint(vars(args))

Tests
"""""
.. code-block:: bash

    # python prog.py
    usage: prog.py [-h] {deploy,migrate} ...
    prog.py: error: too few arguments

    #Â python vm.py deploy --help
    usage: vm.py deploy
             {
                 -n NAME -d DEST -t MODEL
                 -i IP,NETMASK,GATEWAY,VLAN [IP2,NETMASK2,VLAN2 ...]
             } | { -f YAML_FILE [-d DEST] [-t model] }
             [-c CORES] [-m MEMORY] [--resize SIZE] [--format FORMAT]
             [--disks SUFFIX1,SIZE1 [SUFFIX2,SIZE2 ...]]
             [--force] [--no_check] [--nbd DEV] [--no-autostart]
             [--vgroot VGROOT] [--lvroot LVROOT]
             [--src-host HOST] [--src-conf PATH] [--src-disks PATH]
             [--dst-conf PATH] [--dst-disks PATH]

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      -n NAME, --name NAME  Name of the VM to deploy.
      -f FILE, --file FILE  YAML File for deploying many hosts. Required
                            parameters on the file are the name and the network
                            configuration. The others parameters are retrieving
                            from the command line (or default values). However,
                            destination and model have no defaults values and must
                            be defined somewhere!
      -d DST_HOST, --dst-host DST_HOST
                            Host on which deploy the new VM.
      -i [INTERFACES [INTERFACES ...]], --interfaces [INTERFACES [INTERFACES ...]]
                            Network interfaces separated by spaces. Parameters of
                            each interfaces are separated by commas. The first
                            interface has four parameters: IP address, netmask,
                            gateway and VLAN. The others interfaces have the same
                            parameters except the gateway.
      -t {redhat5.8,redhat6.3,centos5,ubuntu-lucid,ubuntu-natty,ubuntu-oneiric,ubuntu-precise,w2003,w2008-r2}, --model {redhat5.8,redhat6.3,centos5,ubuntu-lucid,ubuntu-natty,ubuntu-oneiric,ubuntu-precise,w2003,w2008-r2}
                            Model on which the new VM is based.
      -c CORES, --cores CORES
                            Number of cores assigned to the VM (default: 2).
      -m MEMORY, --memory MEMORY
                            Memory (in Gb) assigned to the VM (default: 1).
      --format {raw,qcow2}  Format of the image(s). If format is different from
                            'qcow2', the image is converting to the specified
                            format (this could be a little long!).
      --resize RESIZE       Resize (in fact, only increase) the main disk image
                            and, for linux system, allocate the new size on the
                            root LVM Volume Group. This option only work on KVM
                            host which have a version of qemu superior to 0.??!
      --disks [DISKS [DISKS ...]]
                            Add new disk(s). Parameters are a suffix and the size.
                            Filename of the created image is NAME-SUFFIX.FORMAT
                            (ex: mavm-datas.qcow2).
      --force               If a virtual machine already exists on destination
                            host, configuration and disk images are automaticaly
                            backuped then overwrited!
      --no-check            Ignore checking of resources (Use with cautions!).
      --no-autostart        Don't set autostart of the VM.
      --nbd NBD             NBD device to use (default: '/dev/nbd0').
      --vgroot VGROOT       Name of the LVM root Volume Group (default: 'sys').
      --lvroot LVROOT       Name of the LVM root Logical Volume (default: 'root')
      --src-host SRC_HOST   Host on which models are stored (default: 'bes1')
      --src-conf SRC_CONF   Path of configurations files on the source host
                            (default: '/vm/conf').
      --src-disks SRC_DISKS
                            Path of images files on the source host (default:
                            '/vm/disk').
      --dst-conf DST_CONF   Path of configurations files on the destination host
                            (default: '/vm/conf').
      --dst-disks DST_DISKS
                            Path of disks files on the destination host (default:
                            '/vm/disk')

    # python vm.py deploy
    usage: vm.py deploy
             {
                 -n NAME -d DEST -t MODEL
                 -i IP,NETMASK,GATEWAY,VLAN [IP2,NETMASK2,VLAN2 ...]
             } | { -f YAML_FILE [-d DEST] [-t model] }
             [-c CORES] [-m MEMORY] [--resize SIZE] [--format FORMAT]
             [--disks SUFFIX1,SIZE1 [SUFFIX2,SIZE2 ...]]
             [--force] [--no_check] [--nbd DEV] [--no-autostart]
             [--vgroot VGROOT] [--lvroot LVROOT]
             [--src-host HOST] [--src-conf PATH] [--src-disks PATH]
             [--dst-conf PATH] [--dst-disks PATH]
    vm.py deploy: error: one of the arguments -n/--name -f/--file is required

    #Â python vm.py deploy -n guest1
    usage: vm.py deploy
             {
                 -n NAME -d DEST -t MODEL
                 -i IP,NETMASK,GATEWAY,VLAN [IP2,NETMASK2,VLAN2 ...]
             } | { -f YAML_FILE [-d DEST] [-t model] }
             [-c CORES] [-m MEMORY] [--resize SIZE] [--format FORMAT]
             [--disks SUFFIX1,SIZE1 [SUFFIX2,SIZE2 ...]]
             [--force] [--no_check] [--nbd DEV] [--no-autostart]
             [--vgroot VGROOT] [--lvroot LVROOT]
             [--src-host HOST] [--src-conf PATH] [--src-disks PATH]
             [--dst-conf PATH] [--dst-disks PATH]
    vm.py deploy: error: argument --n/--name: need --d/--dst-host argument

    #Â python vm.py deploy -n guest1 -d hypervisor1 -i 192.168.122.1,255.255.255.0,192.168.122.1,500 -t test
    usage: vm.py deploy
             {
                 -n NAME -d DEST -t MODEL
                 -i IP,NETMASK,GATEWAY,VLAN [IP2,NETMASK2,VLAN2 ...]
             } | { -f YAML_FILE [-d DEST] [-t model] }
             [-c CORES] [-m MEMORY] [--resize SIZE] [--format FORMAT]
             [--disks SUFFIX1,SIZE1 [SUFFIX2,SIZE2 ...]]
             [--force] [--no_check] [--nbd DEV] [--no-autostart]
             [--vgroot VGROOT] [--lvroot LVROOT]
             [--src-host HOST] [--src-conf PATH] [--src-disks PATH]
             [--dst-conf PATH] [--dst-disks PATH]
    vm.py deploy: error: argument -t/--model: invalid choice: 'test' (choose from 'redhat5.8', 'redhat6.3', 'centos5', 'ubuntu-lucid', 'ubuntu-natty', 'ubuntu-oneiric', 'ubuntu-precise', 'w2003', 'w2008-r2')

    # python vm.py deploy -n guest1 -d hypervisor1 -i 192.168.122.2,255.255.255.0,192.168.122.1,500 -t ubuntu-precise -c 4 -m 4
    'main' function on 'deploy' module
    {'command0': 'deploy',
     'cores': 4,
     'disks': [],
     'dst_conf': '/vm/conf',
     'dst_disks': '/vm/disk',
     'dst_host': 'hypervisor1',
     'file': None,
     'force': False,
     'format': 'qcow2',
     'interfaces': ['192.168.122.1,255.255.255.0,192.168.122.1,500'],
     'lvroot': 'root',
     'memory': 4,
     'model': 'ubuntu-precise',
     'name': 'guest1',
     'nbd': '/dev/nbd0',
     'no_autostart': True,
     'no_check': False,
     'resize': None,
     'src_conf': '/vm/conf',
     'src_disks': '/vm/disk',
     'src_host': 'bes1',
     'vgroot': 'sys'}

    #Â python vm.py deploy -f test.yml -n guest1
    usage: vm.py deploy
             {
                 -n NAME -d DEST -t MODEL
                 -i IP,NETMASK,GATEWAY,VLAN [IP2,NETMASK2,VLAN2 ...]
             } | { -f YAML_FILE [-d DEST] [-t model] }
             [-c CORES] [-m MEMORY] [--resize SIZE] [--format FORMAT]
             [--disks SUFFIX1,SIZE1 [SUFFIX2,SIZE2 ...]]
             [--force] [--no_check] [--nbd DEV] [--no-autostart]
             [--vgroot VGROOT] [--lvroot LVROOT]
             [--src-host HOST] [--src-conf PATH] [--src-disks PATH]
             [--dst-conf PATH] [--dst-disks PATH]
    vm.py deploy: error: argument -n/--name: not allowed with argument -f/--file

    #Â python vm.py deploy -f test.yml -i 192.168.122.2,255.255.255.0,192.168.122.1,500
    usage: vm.py deploy
             {
                 -n NAME -d DEST -t MODEL
                 -i IP,NETMASK,GATEWAY,VLAN [IP2,NETMASK2,VLAN2 ...]
             } | { -f YAML_FILE [-d DEST] [-t model] }
             [-c CORES] [-m MEMORY] [--resize SIZE] [--format FORMAT]
             [--disks SUFFIX1,SIZE1 [SUFFIX2,SIZE2 ...]]
             [--force] [--no_check] [--nbd DEV] [--no-autostart]
             [--vgroot VGROOT] [--lvroot LVROOT]
             [--src-host HOST] [--src-conf PATH] [--src-disks PATH]
             [--dst-conf PATH] [--dst-disks PATH]
    vm.py deploy: error: argument --f/--file: conflict with --i/--interfaces argument

    #Â python vm.py deploy -f test.yml -d hypervisor1
    'main' function on 'deploy' module
    {'command0': 'deploy',
     'cores': 2,
     'disks': [],
     'dst_conf': '/vm/conf',
     'dst_disks': '/vm/disk',
     'dst_host': 'hypervisor1',
     'file': 'test.yml',
     'force': False,
     'format': 'qcow2',
     'interfaces': None,
     'lvroot': 'root',
     'memory': 1,
     'model': None,
     'name': None,
     'nbd': '/dev/nbd0',
     'no_autostart': True,
     'no_check': False,
     'resize': None,
     'src_conf': '/vm/conf',
     'src_disks': '/vm/disk',
     'src_host': 'bes1',
     'vgroot': 'sys'}

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`

